Let's set the problem.
You have a sequence of
numbers or data in general.
And that can be an
array or a file.
The idea is to create random
permutations of that sequence.
And each permutation
should be equally likely.
Additionally, it
should happen in place.
So basically, you have
just a single array.
You rearrange the elements so
that you get a permutation.
And that happens in
that array itself.
All permutations
are equally likely.
So for instance, this could
be one permutation, another,
yet another, and so on.
There is a nice
algorithm for that.
It's called Fisher-Yates,
after its inventors.
You start off with an
array with N values.
For each i starting from
1 and going to N minus 1,
you choose a random integer
between i and N inclusive.
And you exchange the
element at indices i and j.
The Fortran code is available.
And as you can see, we have
an array with N values.
So that would be, for instance,
real dimension N values.
And then for each
iteration in our loop,
we get a random number that
is between i and N inclusive.
And that's assigned to j.
Then we simply
exchange the values
of positions i and position
j in our array values.
And of course, we
need a function
to provide a random
integer shown here.
So when we run that
algorithm, let's
start with the array which
has the values 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
It doesn't matter, the
values can be anything.
We start with i and j.
i is going to be equal to 1,
the first iteration of do loop.
And suppose that the
random_integer function
returns 3 as its value.
So i is going to be equal to
1, j is going to be equal to 3.
We swap the values at the
first and the third position
in the array.
And we end up with the
array 3, 2, 1, 4, 5.
So the values at the first and
third position of the array
have been exchanged.
For the next iteration of
the do loop, i is equal to 2.
And suppose that the function
random_integer returns 5
as value.
So we exchange the
values at position 2
and position 5 in that array.
We end up with 3, 5, 1, 4, 2.
Third iteration i is equal to 3.
And suppose that the
random choice is 4.
So j is equal to 4.
We exchange the third
and fourth element.
And we end up with
3, 5, 4, 1, 2.
Last iteration, because
i goes from 1 to 4.
So obviously, i will be 4,
and j happens to be 4 as well.
So essentially, nothing
happens because we
exchange the value position 4
with the value at position 4.
Nothing happens, and this
is our final permutation.
We have 3, 5, 4, 1, 2.
And you can prove mathematically
that all permutations
are, in fact, equally
likely as required.
So how do you do
this for large files?
It's not really possible
to just copy that file,
because you can just
run out of disc space.
But that is one application
where direct access
files are quite useful.